OpenIDConnect Policy RFC (#114)
Kuadrant/architecture: rfcs/0000-oidc-policy.md

# `OpenIDConnectPolicy` - a metapolicy

- Feature Name: oidc-policy
- Start Date: 2025-02-05
- RFC PR: [Kuadrant/architecture#0114](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/114)
- Issue tracking: [Kuadrant/architecture#0000](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

The `OpenIDConnectPolicy` aims at helping users to easily & quickly get started with the Kuadrant stack to setup an
[OpenID Connect flow](https://openid.net/developers/how-connect-works/) without needing to initially understand how to
use Kuadrant's `AuthPolicy` to achieve their goals. 

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

There are a few goals this implementation hopes to achieve and set a precedent for introducing more such APIs in
Kuadrant:

 - users looking at an example policy would be able to make mostly sense of it without needing to lookup documentation;
 - the policy would apply sensible defaults in most cases and only require the very minimal input from the user;
 - the idea is to implement it as _metapolicy_, which would only be consumed by a controller to produce a `AuthPolicy`
   that would then enforce the flow;

>  - it is _not_ the goal to expose all the power of the `AuthPolicy` to the user through the new policy, but rather to let

Author: Maybe the proposal laid our here could be expanded to do that? Do you have some concrete use case in mind? Like using data from the requested scope to authorize the request true or not? introspection? hit the `userinfo_endpoint` endpoint to retrieve more data and act upon it?

Would that be a binary decision "only"? i.e. allowed or disallowed? Or should that also, e.g., map a user to specific roles or something that would then be interpreted by the upstream app?

[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

The `OpenIDConnectPolicy` is a direct policy attachment that attaches to one or multiple
[`HttpRoute`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/) objects. Targeted routes will require requests to
carry an access token to be authorized through. Should the token be missing or be invalid, the requesting entity gets
redirected to the `provider`'s `authorizationEndpoint` specified in the policy for them to identify.

It is important to note here that the access token is to be negotiated stored by the client. While this may change in
the future, currently the token is to either be provided by the appropriate HTTP header (`Authorization: Bearer`, which 
is the default source), or by a Cookie.

## Minimal example

Using a very minimal example, we'll use
[gitlab.com](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/integration/openid_connect_provider.html) as our provider for an OpenID Connect
flow to protect all requests routed to our application by the `HttpRoute`.

```yaml
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenIDConnectPolicy
metadata:
  name: gitlab
spec:
  targetRef:
    name: toystore
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io

>     kind: HttpRoute

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
    kind: HTTPRoute
```

Author: At least I was consistent in both cases 🤣 
I'll update my local copy!

  provider:

>     host: gitlab.com

Reviewer: I'm guessing `host` here would be the issuer URL?

Reviewer: Maybe name this field `issuerUrl`?

Author: `issuerHost`? Or do we require a URL then?, i.e. `https://gitlab.com`? Or is it a URI even then?

Author: maybe `provider` was wrong to begin with, or does look like it according to [this](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#Terminology)

Reviewer: I'm afraid host is not enough. The not well-known part in Keycloak for example includes a path prefix always. Then you can append the `/.well-known/openid-configuration` bit to it.

Author: This can be addressed by specifying the `discoveryEndpoint` property in that case, or am I missing something?

Author: Not saying it shouldn't be changed, but here is my understanding: there is no "issuer endpoint", there is authorization, token et al endpoints. So my thinking was that `host` is just a shorthand, that's generally understood and all that's needed _and isn't mandatory_. So if you want to specify _any_ OpenID Connect (Discovery) endpoint, they would exists and be an option _always_.

Reviewer: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9207.html

Author: Also, if we did that (which I'm cool with btw), would we then revert back the parent from `issuer` to `provider`? So that:

```yaml
provider:
  issuer: https://gitlab.com
```

Reviewer: > so are you arguing to make `host` -> `issuer`?

Yes. Unless I misunderstood it and the `host` is not the thing that identifies and lets us find the auth server.

> would we then revert back the parent from `issuer` to `provider`?

Maybe I'm missing something, but the parent says `provider` now in the text.

Anyway, I would keep `provider` as is, rename the `host` field as `issuer`, and make it a URL instead of just a host name－exactly as you suggested I guess, i.e.:

```yaml
provider:
  issuer: https://gitlab.com
```

Author: Yeah, I hadn't pushed the latest changes to not loose these discussions. Dunno where/how it was decided but committed that change yesterday locally. Let me revert and use `issuer` as a URL then!

information from the endpoint can be manually specified under `provider` to mitigate these failures. These values would
also override any values successfully obtained from querying the provider's endpoint.

Next, we'll have to identify our request with the provider using the `clientID` that were
provided to us by, in this example, gitlab. You'd probably rather store these in a `credentialsRef` instead as we did
here. A `credentialsRef` would point to a Kubernetes'
[`Secret`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/) with the required information. And that's all you
should need to get started with to use an OpenID Connect provider to authorize access to your application. 

## The complete `OpenIDConnectPolicy`

Here is an example of the complete proposal for configuring an authorization flow using OpenID Connect:

```yaml
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenIDConnectPolicy
metadata:
  name: gitlab
spec:
  targetRef:
    name: toystore
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HttpRoute
  tokenSource: authorizationHeader
  provider:
    host: gitlab.com
    discoveryEndpoint: https://gitlab.com/.well-known/openid-configuration

>     authorizationEndpoint: https://gitlab.com/oauth/authorize

Reviewer: I can see how these defaults, if not specified (overridden) by the user, could be filled using a `MutatingAdmissionPolicy`.

Author: I think I like the idea, cause the resulting CR would be explicit... which leads to some self explanatory documentation for the user. Or at least pointers for them to use

Reviewer 2: Did some reading on `MutatingAdmissionPolicy` and I'm not completely getting how this would be used. Is the suggestion to change the `kind` of this policy from `OpenIDConnectPolicy` to `MutatingAdmissionPolicy` or would there be a separate `MutatingAdmissionPolicy`?

Author: Yes on the update. We can't have the API server resolve the default values for us, unless it'd do the request to the discovery endpoint for us. And that's not possible, but doing it on the admission webhook, i.e. that gets called to _admit_ the new resource, and that we would provide, that would do the call and fill the "blanks".

Author: I think a `MutatingAdmissionPolicy` or a webhook (as the [metacontroller](https://metacontroller.github.io/metacontroller/guide/create.html) project does it), wouldn't be good enough I realize to resolve the defaults... if they come from Gateway API resources, as ... they aren't frozen in time. 

Thinking about it further, I am of the opinion, these CEL expression should be passed along to the "resulting polic(y|ies)" (the expression themselves tho, i.e. they could become of a complete different property or multiple ones, or composed, or whatever) and then resolved _at the right time_ by the controller or possibly even on the dataplane. 

We _could_ pass some new root bindings with (roots?) or the DAG to the different environments that evaluate these when absolutely needed, but possibly have the Kuadrant controller (which owns and resolves the DAG) evaluates them and pass the resulting value "down the delegation chain". That would also mean reevaluate them when changes to the DAG happen. @guicassolato @KevFan @Boomatang others wdyt?

Author: Addressed this shortcoming in this [Open Architecture RFC](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/115), which is concrete proposal on how to go about it.

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

The `OpenIDConnectPolicy` aims at helping users to easily & quickly get started with the Kuadrant stack to setup an
[OpenID Connect flow](https://openid.net/developers/how-connect-works/) without needing to initially understand how to
use Kuadrant's `AuthPolicy` to achieve their goals. 

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

There are a few goals this implementation hopes to achieve and set a precedent for introducing more such APIs in
Kuadrant:

 - users looking at an example policy would be able to make mostly sense of it without needing to lookup documentation;
 - the policy would apply sensible defaults in most cases and only require the very minimal input from the user;
 - the idea is to implement it as _metapolicy_, which would only be consumed by a controller to produce a `AuthPolicy`
   that would then enforce the flow;
 - it is _not_ the goal to expose all the power of the `AuthPolicy` to the user through the new policy, but rather to let
   users achieve most of their goals by slowly exploring defaults of the policy and eventually dig down the stack, into
   the `AuthPolicy` to expand their use cases when they need it;

>  - explore how to, overtime, grow the initial minimal API of the policy into a larger one to cover more use cases than

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - explore how to, over time, grow the initial minimal API of the policy into a larger one to cover more use cases than
```

   the one currently set as the goal for this RFC

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

The `OpenIDConnectPolicy` is a direct policy attachment that attaches to one or multiple
[`HTTPRoute`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/) objects. Targeted routes will require requests to
carry an access token to be authorized through. Should the token be missing or be invalid, the requesting entity gets
redirected to the `provider`'s `authorizationEndpoint` specified in the policy for them to identify.

It is important to note here that the access token is to be negotiated stored by the client. While this may change in
the future, currently the token is to either be provided by the appropriate HTTP header (`Authorization: Bearer`, which 

> is the default source), or by a Cookie.

Reviewer 3: impl detail, but thoughts on cookie name? oidc connect novice, but unaware of a convention (as opposed to the authz: bearer header)

Reviewer 3: other random thought: what has precedence if both present?

Author: `tokenSource: ` would be overridden to e.g. `cookie`. So either we make it aware of the `name` to look for (e.g. `cookie["auth"]`; or make it another config bit (e.g. `tokenSourceKey`?); and/or with a sensible default (e.g. `Bearer`?); I'm wondering if this wouldn't best be expressed as CEL ... "somehow".

wrt to precedence, it don't matter, as the user specify what "source" to use.

to redirect unauthorized requests to.

If the request for the additional metadata fails, all access to the protected resources will be `Unauthorized`. All the
information from the endpoint can be manually specified under `provider` to mitigate these failures. These values would
also override any values successfully obtained from querying the provider's endpoint.

Next, we'll have to identify our request with the provider using the `clientID` that were
provided to us by, in this example, gitlab. You'd probably rather store these in a `credentialsRef` instead as we did
here. A `credentialsRef` would point to a Kubernetes'
[`Secret`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/) with the required information. And that's all you
should need to get started with to use an OpenID Connect provider to authorize access to your application. 

## The complete `OpenIDConnectPolicy`

Here is an example of the complete proposal for configuring an authorization flow using OpenID Connect:

```yaml
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenIDConnectPolicy
metadata:
  name: gitlab

> spec:
>   targetRef:
>     name: toystore
>     group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
>     kind: HTTPRoute
>   tokenSource: authorizationHeader
>   provider:
>     issuer: https://gitlab.com
>     discoveryEndpoint: https://gitlab.com/.well-known/openid-configuration
>     authorizationEndpoint: https://gitlab.com/oauth/authorize
>     authorizationEndpointPayload:
>       query:
>         client_id: provider.credentials.clientID
>         redirect_uri: gatewaysFor(target)[0].listeners[0].hostname + "/oauth/callback"
>         scope: openid
>         response_type: code
>     tokenEndpoint: https://gitlab.com/oauth/token
>     introspectionEndpoint: https://gitlab.com/oauth/introspect
>     jwksUri: https://gitlab.com/oauth/discovery/keys
>     credentials:
>       clientID: 35001bfef37042bf2fb125e9e8f99f0c719231632ab62a18cbf5220c3d1f8f10
>       clientSecret: gloas-35001bfef37042bf2fb125e9e8f99f0c719231632ab62a18cbf5220c3d1f8f10
>     redirectUri: 
>       host: example.org
>       path: /oauth/callback

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
spec:
  targetRef:
    name: toystore
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute
  provider: # holds config for the IDP
    issuerURL: https://gitlab.com # optional, one of issuerURL or jwksURL
    jwksURL: https://gitlab.com/oauth/discovery/keys # optional, one of issuerURL or jwksURL
    clientID: 35001bfef37042bf2fb125e9e8f99f0c719231632ab62a18cbf5220c3d1f8f10 # most probably the only one not optional
    clientSecret: gloas-35001bfef37042bf2fb125e9e8f99f0c719231632ab62a18cbf5220c3d1f8f10  # optional
    discoveryEndpoint: https://gitlab.com/.well-known/openid-configuration # optional
    authorizationEndpoint: https://gitlab.com/oauth/authorize # optional
    authorizationEndpointQuery: # optional, representing a map[string]string
      client_id: provider.credentials.clientID
      redirect_uri: gatewaysFor(target)[0].listeners[0].hostname + "/oauth/callback"
      scope: openid
      response_type: code
    tokenEndpoint: https://gitlab.com/oauth/token # optional
    introspectionEndpoint: https://gitlab.com/oauth/introspect # optional
    redirectURL: https://example.org/auth/callback # optional 
    auth: # holds config for both AuthN and AuthZ
      tokenSource: authorizationHeader # optional, default `cookie`
      claims: # https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7519.html#section-4 use for AuthN purposes, representad as a map[string]string
        groups_direct: "kuadrant"
        iss: http://gitlab.com
```

Was thinking on flatten a bit the _Provider_ data, and include an _Auth_ section... a bit for separating the areas of concern and application. I've included some comments in the example.
